database 

collection of data in a structured way

SQL 

structured query language

RDBMS 

Relational Database management system

maongodb

it is an opensource cross platform document oriented database

it comes under no sql databse

mongo uses json like document with schemas

indexes in mongo db 

they are special datastructures which improves the speed and efficiency of query by allowing the databse to quickly acess and retrieve data.

agregation

it is the process of selecting data from a collection to process multiple document and return as computed result

replication 

it is storing multiple copies of data in different servers

sharding 

it is distributing data across multiple machines to improve scalabilty and performance

mongo db driver and mongoos 

there are two ways to interact with mongodb database in node js they are mongo driver and mongoos 

mongoos 

it is a mongodb object document mapper(odm) designed to work in an asynchronous environment .

schema 

it is a structure or a blueprint that defines the organization,format and rules for the data stored in the database

acid properties

they are a set of characteristics that ensure the relaiabilty,consistency and integrity of tranasactions in a dbms.

the 4 properties of acid are

1.atomicity 

it ensures a transaction is happened only once . it ensures the transaction is complete or not , no partial execution 

2.consistency

it ensures a database remains in a valid state before and after the exceution of a transaction

3.isolation

it ensures multiple transactions can operate concurrently without interferring eachother 

4. durabilty

it ensures once a transaction is completed , the change it made to the database will be constant even in case of system failure

transaction 

they are sequence of actions which are treated as single operation

authenctication 

it is a process of authenticating someone's identity

authorization 

is the process of giving permission to someone to acess a particular resource

session and cookie

session is a server side file and cookie is client side.

session is storing details of clients and cookie is sending a session id to the client .

cookie is created by using the session id provided by the server

jwt 

it stands for json web token

they are compact and self-contained way to securely transmit information between parties as json object

they are commomnly used for authenctication and authorization in web applications

the key components of jwt are 

1.structure 

jwt consists of three parts seperated by dots('.') , they are the header, the payload and signature. their format is 'header.payload.signature'


header 

it consists of two parts , the type of token which is jwt and the signing algorithm used

payload 

payload contains claims , claims are  statement about the user and additional data .

there are 3 claims reserved, public and private

signature 

it is created by taking the encoded header and encoded payload a secret key incase of (HMAC) and the specified algorithm